JUDY WOODRUFF: Good
evening. I'm Judy Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
JUDY WOODRUFF: On the
"NewsHour" tonight:
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
the United States: While I will
not be a candidate, I
will not be silent.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Vice President
Joe Biden ends months of
speculation -- what his decision
not to run means in the
race for the White House.
GWEN IFILL: Paul Ryan says he is
willing to run for speaker of
the House, but on his own
terms.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Also ahead this
Wednesday: The push to reduce
the nation's prison population
gains unexpected allies. Police
and prosecutors call for fewer
arrests.
GWEN IFILL: And a pioneering
project to uncover the genetic
roots of autism.
LISA WILSON, Mother of Jonathan
Wilson: I called Blair at work,
and I immediately burst
into tears, and I said, this
changes everything and nothing.
GWEN IFILL: All that and more
on tonight's "PBS NewsHour."
(BREAK)
GWEN IFILL: For Democrats, a
season of uncertainty is at an
end: Vice President Joe Biden
will
not join the presidential
race after all.
He'd pondered the possibility at
least since summer, and
announced his decision today in
the White House Rose Garden.
Joined by his wife, Jill, and
President Obama, he said he
and his family took the time to
consider all political options
after his son Beau died
of cancer in may.
JOSEPH BIDEN, Vice President of
the United States:
Unfortunately, I believe we are
out
of time, the time necessary to
mount a winning campaign for the
nomination.
But while I will not be a
candidate, I will not be silent.
This party, our nation will
be making a tragic mistake if we
walk away or attempt to undo the
Obama legacy. The American
people have worked too hard and
we have come too far for that.
Democrats shouldn't only
defend this record and protect
this record. They should run on
this record.
GWEN IFILL: The vice president
urged his party to oppose the
influence of unlimited campaign
contributions and to support
making college more accessible.
He also warned against a
partisan divide that he said
is ripping the country apart.
JOSEPH BIDEN: It's
mean-spirited, it's petty, and
it's gone on for much too long.
I don't
believe, like some do, that it's
naive to talk to Republicans.
I don't think we should look at
Republicans as our enemies. They
are our opposition. They're
not our enemies. And for the
sake of the country, we have to
work together.
GWEN IFILL: The Biden decision
removed a potential challenge to
Democratic front-runner Hillary
Clinton. She, in turn, praised
him as a good friend and a great
man. We will look more
deeply into the decision, and
its implications, after the news
summary.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In other news,
Syria's President Bashar
al-Assad has made a surprise
visit
to Moscow, his first known trip
abroad since civil war broke out
in his country in 2011.
Russia and Syrian officials now
say that Assad held talks
yesterday with Russian President
Vladimir Putin, and that he
expressed gratitude for Russian
support, including from
warplanes
and military helicopters.
BASHAR AL-ASSAD, President of
Syria (through translator): To
begin with, thank you to the
country of Russia. Terrorism
which we see spreading today
could have been more widespread
and more harmful if not for your
decisions and steps. With all
certainty, a political
solution decided upon by the
people of Syria is the future of
Syria in the way that we
envision, and this
is everyone's goal.
JUDY WOODRUFF: News of the visit
wasn't confirmed until Assad was
safely back in Damascus. Also
today, the Russians announced
that Foreign Minister Sergei
Lavrov will meet with Secretary
of State John Kerry on Friday in
Vienna. They will be joined by
counterparts from Saudi
Arabia and Turkey.
GWEN IFILL: Israeli Prime
Minister Benjamin Netanyahu drew
a storm of criticism today
for linking the Holocaust to a
Palestinian leader from World
War II.
In Jerusalem yesterday,
Netanyahu cited a 1941 meeting
involving the grand mufti of
Jerusalem, a known
Nazi sympathizer.
BENJAMIN NETANYAHU, Israeli
Prime Minister: He had a central
role in fomenting the final
solution. He flew to Berlin.
Hitler didn't want to
exterminate the Jews at the
time.
He wanted to expel the Jews. And
Haj Amin al-Husseini went there
and said, "If you expel
them, they will all come here."
"So, what should I do
with them?" he asked.
He said, "Burn them."
GWEN IFILL: Palestinians, along
with Holocaust experts and
survivors and the chancellor of
Germany, said the comment was
factually wrong, and could
incite violence.
Today, as Netanyahu left on a
trip to Germany, he said he's
not absolving Hitler, but he
argued it's absurd to ignore
the mufti's statements.
JUDY WOODRUFF: President Obama
called today for better
physician training and other
steps
to battle an epidemic of
prescription drug abuse and
heroin use. He traveled to
Charleston
in West Virginia, the state with
the highest rate of overdose
deaths in the country. There,
he said he will press for
expanded treatment for addicts.
GWEN IFILL: Toyota has ordered a
new recall, this time for a
faulty power window switch
that can overheat and
potentially cause a fire. The
automaker says more than
six-and-a-half
million vehicles worldwide are
affected. Some two million of
those are in the U.S.
Toyota was hit by fines in the
U.S. after a 2009 scandal over
faulty floor mats, brakes
and gas pedals.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Wall Street
had another down day, after
another batch of disappointing
corporate earnings. The Dow
Jones industrial average lost 48
points to close at 17168.
The Nasdaq fell almost 41
points, and the S&P 500 slid
nearly 12.
Still to come on the "NewsHour":
Joe Biden, what does it mean
that he's not running?;
Paul Ryan says he will serve as
House speaker, but only if;
colder weather brings more
trouble
for thousands of
migrants, and much more.
GWEN IFILL: It has been a
months-long waiting game, but
now that we know Vice President
Biden will not make another run
for the White House, what drove
his decision, and what does
it mean for the rest
of the 2016 field?
Glenn Thrush, the chief
political correspondent for
Politico, has been covering
this, and
in many ways was able to see
around the corner in this
magazine profile earlier this
year,
"Joe Biden in Winter."
Glenn joins me now.
So, after all the ups and the
downs and the speculation, no
go. Why?
GLENN THRUSH, Politico: No, I
mean, there is a number of
reasons, sort of bifurcated
between his emotional life and
this terrible tragedy that he
suffered with the death of
his 46-year-old son, Beau, in
May, but also there was really
no political path.
Biden is sort of a political
procrastinator. He's a very
improvisational politician and
he really waited too long.
Hillary Clinton's performance in
the first debate and this
commensurate
rise in the polls that she saw
afterwards simply left him with
no path.
GWEN IFILL: Your story that you
posted this afternoon, you quote
someone as saying that
all the meetings, all the
speculation, all the ways they
were running traps was more
fantasy football than football.
GLENN THRUSH: Yes, I think he
was really confined to a
relatively small group of
advisers. Shouldn't
surprise folks who know the way
that Biden operates, a lot of
his family.
His son Hunter, his remaining
son, was really pushing him for
this. Also, Mike Donilon,
a longtime aide from Delaware,
was pushing this. But the rest
of the family was fairly
ambivalent and his larger circle
of advisers were more
facilitating what he wanted to
do,
but I think many of them over
time came to believe that he
ultimately wouldn't go for
it.
GWEN IFILL: Another thing that
you wrote in your earlier piece,
it talked about one of
his friends and advisers saying
that in his career Joe Biden had
climbed almost all the
way to the top, and then
someone moved the ladder.
GLENN THRUSH: Can you imagine
what that must feel like?
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
GLENN THRUSH: This is a guy who
has done everything -- quote,
unquote -- "right."
The problem is, at some point,
he reached, I think, his own
ceiling. The 1988 presidential
campaign, which was disastrous
for him, he was accused of
plagiarizing Neil Kinnock's
speeches, a U.K. politician.
GWEN IFILL: Yes.
GLENN THRUSH: Really, I think
that was his moment. In 2008, he
ran a very bad presidential
campaign. I think Biden is
really an example of, when a
politician has a moment and they
cannot capitalize on that
moment, the rest of their career
really is a postscript.
GWEN IFILL: What was the
significance of doing this in
the Rose Garden with not only
his
wife, but President
Obama by his side?
GLENN THRUSH: Well, the initial
significance for those of us who
were still wondering what
was happening, we knew then he
was going to say no. He wasn't
going to say yes standing
next to the president.
But I think the significance is
that Joe Biden views himself as
both a family man, as symbolized
by his wife -- getting Jill on
board was one of the big
challenges for this. And he
never
really quite closed the
deal with his own wife.
But the more important point
here is, he views himself very
much as a partner with President
Obama, and that relationship,
which really had its ups an
downs in the first term, has
really deepened into something
more personal. I have been
told...
GWEN IFILL: He went out of his
way today to embrace that
legacy.
GLENN THRUSH: Yes. And
apparently after this, they
embraced in the Oval Office. It
was sort
of a tearful moment.
And the president, I am told,
has been very, very concerned
about Biden's state of mind
subsequent to Beau Biden's
death. This is something that
really weighs on everyone.
GWEN IFILL: So he said today
the window had closed.
Was it Hillary Clinton basically
who closed the window?
GLENN THRUSH: I think she sort
of slammed it on his fingers.
If Hillary Clinton had performed
badly in that first debate or
there had been more damaging
revelations about the e-mails
that had come out, I think we
might be dealing with a
different
fact set. But my sense
is that really did it.
GWEN IFILL: And she went out of
her way, we can take a look, to
be very gracious in her
response to him.
She said, among other things:
"Joe Biden is a good man and a
great vice president. I'm
confident that history isn't
finished with Joe Biden. As he
said today, there is more
work to do, and if I know Joe,
he will always be on the front
lines, always fighting for
all of us."
Now, let's just talk polls. With
Joe Biden out of the race,
Hillary Clinton can afford
to be as gracious as she is.
GLENN THRUSH: Oh, absolutely.
I think it is a good day. I'm
sure she had a nice cup of tea
and watched this thing several
times. Look, in all of the polls
that we have seen, Biden takes
away from Hillary Clinton's
support in battleground states
and nationally as well. So what
this means is that I think
it's quite likely we are going
to see a bump in the national
polls and in New Hampshire
and in Iowa for Hillary Clinton.
GWEN IFILL: No Bernie Sanders
bump out of this? None of the
people who are supporting
Bernie Sanders were
drawing toward Biden?
GLENN THRUSH: Yes, Biden is a
fairly centrist -- you could
make the argument Joe Biden,
in the longer span of his
career, has actually been more
conservative than Hillary
Clinton
on a lot of things.
He has tacked to the left, as
everyone in the Democratic Party
has recently, but Biden's
affiliation is with the white
working-class voters. And Bernie
Sanders much more appeals
to the sort of coastal elites. I
think Sanders will see a little
bit of a bump, because I'm
sure some supporters will flock
to him. But I think Hillary
Clinton is the one who is
going to be the
predominant recipient.
GWEN IFILL: And, finally, the
vice president seemed to signal
today this is not the end
of his career. He still
wants to be heard.
Is there any history of a
second-term vice president who
is not running for president
being heard after
finally withdrawing?
GLENN THRUSH: I think you make a
very good point here. I think
his moment of maximum
leverage has passed.
I think the one thing that is
left is an endorsement. As we
know -- and I covered Hillary
Clinton
in 2007 and 2008 -- there are a
lot of bumps left in this road,
and she will need to pull
some endorsements out of her
pocket during times of need. I
think the final card that
he has to play is
an endorsement.
GWEN IFILL: Well, we will be all
waiting for that, that it will
have a huge impact, perhaps,
perhaps not.
That's the thing we like about
campaigns, Glenn Thrush of
Politico. Thank you very much.
GLENN THRUSH: Great being here.
JUDY WOODRUFF: From a decision
made to another one pending.
Wisconsin Congressman Paul Ryan
has told his fellow Republicans
that he is willing to serve
as speaker of the House of
Representatives, but only if
divided groups of conservatives
endorse him first.
Political director Lisa
Desjardins reports on a busy day
in the search for a leader.
LISA DESJARDINS: The could-be
speaker laid out his demands
Tuesday night: unified party
backing and family time.
REP. PAUL RYAN (R), Wisconsin: I
have shown my colleagues what I
think success looks like,
what I think it takes to unify
and leads and how my family
commitments comes first. I have
left this decision
in their hands.
LISA DESJARDINS: Paul Ryan's
clear ultimatum landed in a
packed, wild Capitol this
morning.
Reporters surrounded lawmakers
in the conservative House
Freedom Caucus, the rebellious
group
that Ryan says must
sign on for him to run.
But members like Alabama's Mo
Brooks were cool to the idea.
REP. MO BROOKS (R), Alabama: I
don't think there is any
question that a significant
number
of members of the Republican
Conference have coerced,
cajoled, induced Paul Ryan to
run
for speaker of the House when
he doesn't want that job.
LISA DESJARDINS: Idaho's Raul
Labrador is another Freedom
Caucus member.
REP. RAUL LABRADOR (R), Idaho:
There's a lot of people who can
do it. Jason Chaffetz would
be a very good speaker
of the House.
LISA DESJARDINS: While many
members avoided questions and
sought out the elevators,
current
Speaker John Boehner pushed
for stability and Ryan.
REP. JOHN BOEHNER (R-OH),
Speaker of the House: Listen, I
think Paul is going to get the
support
that he is looking for. I
thought he laid out a very clear
vision for how he would run
the speakership. And I thought
the members responded very well
to it.
LISA DESJARDINS: Moderate Peter
King of New York was less sure
that Ryan would get enough
support, and therefore
more worried.
REP. PETER KING (R), New York: I
don't see who else it could be.
If it's not Paul Ryan,
then I think it's a disaster.
LISA DESJARDINS: Already, some
outside conservatives are on the
attack. A group called the Tea
Party Patriots released a video
highlighting Ryan's support of
the 2008 stimulus bill.
REP. PAUL RYAN: This bill
offends my principles, but I'm
going to vote for this bill in
order
to preserve my principles.
LISA DESJARDINS: That underlines
the divide for Republicans, who
face a Friday deadline
set by Ryan. The Wisconsin
representative is using his
leverage to see if he can take
command without becoming
a political casualty.
REP. PAUL RYAN: What I told
members is, if you can agree to
these requests, and if I
can truly be a unifying figure,
then I will gladly serve.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And Lisa
joins us from the Capitol.
So, Lisa, this doesn't sound
like a done deal. It's nightfall
there. What are you hearing?
LISA DESJARDINS: That's right.
The members of the House Freedom
Caucus just got out of a meeting
with Paul Ryan. Congressman
Ryan had very little to say, but
he told our Quinn Bowman, our
producer here, the meeting
went well. He said it was a
nice meeting. But that's it.
We did get more information from
the Freedom Caucus members, and
I think you put it the
best way there, that this is
still up in the air, Judy. They
are going to meet again later
tonight. They may vote tonight
and that vote may be the most
significant part of this fight
this week. The vote could
be tomorrow as well.
But the reason that vote is very
difficult for Mr. Ryan is that
the House of Freedom
Caucus has their own internal
rules, Judy, where they will
only support a candidate if
80 percent of their members
agree to do so. You are talking
then about 80 percent of the
most conservative members of the
House of Representatives, the
members who wanted John
Boehner out and some of whom are
pretty openly saying they are
not so sure about Paul Ryan
either.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, we know the
rest of the Republican
membership in the House of
Representatives
supports Paul Ryan, but how
influential is anybody in the
outside with these Freedom
Caucus members? I mean, who do
they listen to? Who can
influence them?
LISA DESJARDINS: I think these
are members who listen most of
all to their core constituency.
But that does include not just
the voters in their districts,
who do skew very conservative.,
that is why they have been
elected, but who also -- they
also listen to, say,
conservative
talk radio and the Tea Party.
As we put in the package, some
Tea Party groups have already
come out against Paul Ryan
today.
And that's something that is a
factor in these members'
decisions the next couple of
days.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa, you were
telling me just a few minutes
ago that there is now some
discussion
about trying to deal with
raising the debt ceiling before
there's a vote on a new speaker.
What about that?
LISA DESJARDINS: This is a very
tricky game of chess happening
right now. Not only is
the House trying to bring in a
new leader, but they're also
trying to manage three different
crises coming soon.
And speaking to a top Republican
aide in leadership currently
told me tonight that they would
like to pass an increase in the
debt ceiling before there is a
new speaker, before next
week's vote, which may include
Mr. Ryan. And that vote, Judy,
on the debt ceiling could
come as soon as this week. It's
something that those in power
now in the House want
to do before any new
speaker comes into power.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But we also know
it's something the members of
the Freedom Caucus, most
conservative
members, presumably,
wouldn't want.
LISA DESJARDINS:
Yes, that's right.
And here is where you get into
the complexity of this
situation. The House Freedom
Caucus
realizes that they don't have
potentially another viable
candidate outside of Paul Ryan,
but at the same time, they're
trying to get, I think, as much
out of the situation as they
can, trying to get as many
guarantees as they can from him
about their own agenda.
And that includes trying to get
as many concessions from
Democrats on the debt ceiling.
So it's
complicated. The debt ceiling
might be a factor here in their
discussions with Mr. Ryan, but,
moreover, they're questioning
whether they think he will
actually change things in the
House. One congressman, Raul
Labrador, said to me and other
reporters, you know, we all
like Paul Ryan, but this isn't
about personality. We're just
not sure he can change things
because
he hasn't changed things
yet in the House.
You follow that line of
thinking, if you are outside of
that conservative caucus, Judy,
and it still doesn't make it
clear what the endgame is. I
think tonight could be an
important
night. We will see what the
Freedom Caucus does. And, of
course, Friday is the deadline
that Mr. Ryan set as to whether
he will be viable to run for
speaker.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Lisa Desjardins
watching it all very closely at
the Capitol, thank you.
LISA DESJARDINS: Thank you.
GWEN IFILL: As winter approaches
across Europe, migrants and
refugees desperate to enter the
E.U. face even
bigger challenges.
Hari Sreenivasan
reports from Greece.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Billowing
smoke signified the latest
threat to the thousands crossing
Southern Europe: fire. It
erupted at a camp along
Slovenia's border with Croatia
and jumped
from tent to tent, likely
sparked by bonfires, as migrants
struggled to keep warm. There
was no word of casualties.
The camp is one of many that
Slovenia has filled to capacity
since thousands began arriving
from Croatia over the weekend. A
number of people in the camp had
just arrived after
a brutal 24 hours. During the
night, a train from Croatia
released them near the frontier.
Then, in near-freezing
temperatures, they were forced
to wade across a river.
MAN: It was very cold. It was a
very big -- after that, we
decided to come in here. We need
help. We need dress.
We need food.
HARI SREENIVASAN: After the
fire, many in the camp were
taken away on buses headed north
to Austria. Elsewhere today,
hundreds waited in fields
guarded by Slovenian authorities
waiting to be told
where to go next.
MAN: I do not think it's Europe
like this, but when I come to
here, so difficult. I'm
sorry for Europe. Europe is sad.
HARI SREENIVASAN: The Slovenes
have appealed to the European
Union for help. And early
today, their Parliament
authorized a greater role for
the army, guarding the border
with
Croatia.
Thousands more migrants have
trekked through Greece and
Macedonia to Serbia, where
they're
pressing to continue their own
journeys into Western Europe.
Overnight, some 3,500 spent
the night in the freezing cold
at the Serbian-Croatian border
after Croatian officials closed
the
gates.
WOMAN: The situation is very
challenging. The people were
here all the night. They spend
all the night, because the
border was temporarily closed,
that such a capacity was very
slow.
So, many families with children,
elderly people, people with
disability were spending the
night
here.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Scuffles broke
out as the frustration of
waiting proved too much for
some. As before, others took
matters into their own hands,
crossing fields and orchards
at dawn, evading police
where they could.
Meanwhile, in Vienna, the head
of Croatia's police met with his
counterparts from Hungary,
Slovenia and Austria.
VLADO DOMINIC, Croatian Police
Director (through translator):
The daily influx from Macedonia
and Serbia into Croatia is about
10,000 migrants. They are
transferred every day towards
the
Slovenian border, and Slovenia
moves them towards Austria. We
must stem the migrant
crisis as soon as possible, so
that we reduce the number of
migrants arriving to Europe.
HARI SREENIVASAN: To that end,
the president of the European
Commission called a Sunday
summit of the Balkan states and
others. But the human surge
showed no signs of abating.
In Greece, three giant ferries a
day are bring refugees to
Athens' main port from the Greek
islands where they land.
This ship, which arrived just
before dawn, carried roughly
2,000 people, most of them
headed on to buses to take them
north. By now, though, some like
Mohammad Ghunaim, a
Syrian medical student, have
tempered their enthusiasm.
MOHAMMAD GHUNAIM, Syrian Medical
Student: Very happy and excited,
but I have to make
my own plan. I have to make my
own future right now. Europe is
not a big dream. You
will make your dream. It's like
the American dream. How -- the
American dream, you will
make your dream.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Many more were
following that dream across the
Aegean Sea from Turkey
today, despite the
mounting hardships.
More than 500 people survived
heavy rains and thundershowers
to get to the island of
Lesbos on their flimsy boats
today. When they got there,
there wasn't enough shelter.
Volunteers
had already run out of rain
covers, leaving children
standing in the rain. These
migrants
and refugees understand that the
weather will certainly get
worse.
They're also starting to get
concerned about the climate, the
uncertain climate toward
migrants across much
of the European Union.
In Athens, for the "PBS
NewsHour," Hari Sreenivasan.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Stay with us.
Coming up on the "NewsHour":
what to know before Hillary
Clinton testifies on Benghazi;
the search for clues to the
causes of autism; and finding
inspiration in the natural
world.
But first to the latest in
our Broken Justice series.
We have done a number of stories
about calls for reform from
voices across the spectrum.
Tonight, we hear a new call from
top law enforcement officials
themselves.
Today, more than 130 of them,
including police chiefs and
prosecutors, came to Washington
to push for changes to
incarceration and policing
practices. One of the key
reforms they want
to see, reducing or eliminating
prison time for nonviolent
offenses and some drug
possession
charges.
Garry McCarthy is the
superintendent of the Chicago
Police Department. He's co-chair
of
this coalition. And Benjamin
David is the district attorney
for New Hanover and Pender
Counties in Eastern
North Carolina.
And welcome to both of you.
GARRY MCCARTHY, Chicago Police
Superintendent: Thanks for
having us.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So,
Superintendent McCarthy, let me
start with you.
You said today -- among other
things, you said, we incarcerate
the wrong people. We
measure the wrong things when it
comes to the criminal justice
system. What are you
referring to?
GARRY MCCARTHY: I'm referring to
the fact that the violent
offenders, repeat offenders
are too frequently on our
streets causing problems. About
two months ago, I came down
to D.C. again with about 30
different jurisdictions across
the country that all have
increases
in violent crime this year.
And the one commonality that we
had, repeat offenders over and
over again. So, there are
some people who, I'm sorry, do
not deserve to be out in our
society. They're dangerous.
There are other people that
can actually be reformed.
And what we find over and over
again is the low-level narcotics
offender is sometimes
incarcerated at a greater rate
than the violent criminal. In
Cook County -- in Chicago, which
is in Cook County, 28 percent of
the inmates who are incarcerated
in Cook County Jail are
there for narcotics-related
offenses, yet less than 4
percent are there for gun
possession.
And these are folks with violent
criminal histories. That's
causing a danger in our
streets.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, District
Attorney David, what is an
example of an offense that -- we
just heard it has to do with
narcotics, for example. So, if
somebody is carrying around
a small amount of heroin or
cocaine, they shouldn't be
arrested? What should happen
to them?
BENJAMIN DAVID, District
Attorney, New Hanover and Pender
Counties, North Carolina: No,
they
should be arrested, but to be
clear, justice reinvestment in
North Carolina, where I serve
as the district attorney, we
make it mandatory that they are
going to receive probation for
a drug possession case, and to
have the opportunity for a
deferred prosecution.
We went one step further and
also made it where you could
expunge the nonviolent criminal
history of a felon or someone
with a misdemeanor for that
one-time offense, so that they
could
stay eligible for things like
public housing, student loans,
military service, and they
don't have that scarlet letter
on them when they are trying to
get a job, because that
is really what we
are talking about.
The second that we put them into
the system, they're on a
different statistical path.
JUDY WOODRUFF: So, are you
saying, in effect,
Superintendent McCarthy, that
somebody who
is out there who has -- say they
have an open container of
alcohol or, as you know, we
mentioned
carrying around drugs, you are
assuming that that is not on the
pathway to committing more
violent offenses?
GARRY MCCARTHY: Well, you know,
I'm not going to make that leap.
But what I can tell you is that
there are people who have
violent criminal histories
that need to be incarcerated.
And those individuals who don't
may not be -- may not need to be
incarcerated. Different
prosecution, different method of
dealing with it. It doesn't mean
we're not going to
make the arrest.
But what happens once that
arrest is made, when that
individual goes into the system?
Can they get deferred from
prosecution into drug treatment
programs or something along
those lines? There is a
difference between carrying a
gun, an illegal gun, and getting
caught with some heroin, a
total difference there.
JUDY WOODRUFF: I understand
that. But I still want to just
clarify this. So, are you
saying,
both of you saying, District
Attorney David, that, for
example, that all those years of
arguing just say no, that drugs
-- stay away from drugs, that
they are a pathway to getting
addicted to heroin, that all
those messages were the wrong
messages?
BENJAMIN DAVID: No, I don't say
that at all. I still say stay
away from drugs. It brings
the wolf to the door. It feeds
all the violence in our
communities right now. It's the
very
gasoline for the
engine of crime.
What we are really saying is
that we need to have the right
people in custody. And mentally
ill drug addicts are not who we
want to clog up the prisons and
the jails with. It is a
scarce resource when are you
talking about those beds. And we
want to put the career
and violent criminals
in those places.
JUDY WOODRUFF: But this is going
to be an expensive, more
expensive approach, isn't
it, Superintendent McCarthy? You
are going to require people with
experience in handling
people with drug addiction,
giving people therapy.
GARRY MCCARTHY: Right.
JUDY WOODRUFF: You're going to
require -- it's going to require
more people, more man-hours,
woman-hours to deal with this.
GARRY MCCARTHY: I don't believe
so. I don't believe so, because,
if you think about it,
we're not changing the behavior
of the drug-addicted individual
by incarcerating them. We may
change
behavior of the gun carrier by
incarcerating them, because he's
not addicted to the gun
like the heroin user might
be addicted to the heroin.
It is the wrong medicine for
what ails us. If we -- we want
to correct the behavior,
the way you correct the behavior
of a drug user is to get them
drug treatment, not
incarcerating
them. The way that you change
the behavior of a bad guy who
carries a gun, you put them
in jail. This prevents them from
committing another crime while
he is in there and maybe
he won't do it again
when he comes out.
JUDY WOODRUFF: What is involved,
Mr. David, in changing the laws
to make this happen,
what you are describing?
BENJAMIN DAVID: Well, first of
all, it is outreach efforts and
understanding, first
and foremost, who we are really
talking about now, with the
biggest victims of violent crime
are also from the same
high-crime neighborhoods.
And when you have a business
model where 98 percent of the
people we are putting in prison
are getting out, and they're not
getting out better, and 66
percent of them are back in
that prison cell within three
years charged with new offenses,
what we're doing is not
protecting the community
in the way that we can.
And so what we really have to do
is, when you are talking about
funding, we're going
to save money by closing some
prisons and not having to build
other ones. That is the
North Carolina experience. But
we are going to use that money,
reinvest it into drug treatment,
into mental health reform, into
having some of the things that
we can do to divert these
cases out of the
criminal justice system.
It involves not only government,
but the business community,
getting people jobs, and getting
schools to stop the
school-to-prison pipeline we
could talk about. There are so
many people
in a community other than law
enforcement, because this is
bigger than police and
prosecutors
can handle on their own.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And one other
philosophy, I guess, that has
been behind us, Superintendent
McCarthy, and that's the
so-called broken windows
approach, going after people who
have
committed minor offenses because
you are afraid they are going to
do something worse.
Is that saying that whole
approach was the wrong approach?
GARRY MCCARTHY: No, not -- the
same issue. It's not that we're
not going to address those
conditions. As a matter of fact,
broken windows is the number one
complaint at our community
meetings from the people
who live in the community.
They want us to address those
low-level issues. The question
is, how is it that we address
them? If we were putting people
in prison for 20 years for
public consumption of alcohol,
that law would change very
quickly. But what we are doing
is, we are putting people in
prison for extended sentences
for low-level amounts of
narcotics.
And that just doesn't work. You
can issue somebody a ticket for
drinking a beer in public
vs. arresting them. You can also
take that drug user and divert
them into a program,
instead of incarcerating them.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Superintendent
Garry McCarthy from Chicago and
District Attorney Ben David
from North Carolina,
we thank you both.
BENJAMIN DAVID: Thank you.
GARRY MCCARTHY:
Pleasure. Thank you.
JUDY WOODRUFF: We recorded that
interview late this afternoon.
And I also asked Superintendent
McCarthy about recently
published allegations of a
pattern of abuse at a police
detention
center in Chicago. He says those
allegations are false. You can
watch his comments online
on our Web site,
PBS.org/NewsHour.
GWEN IFILL: The 2012 attack on
the U.S. Consulate and CIA
compound in Benghazi, Libya, has
sparked
a firestorm of recrimination and
accusation, touching on policy
and politics.
As former Secretary of State
Hillary Clinton prepares to
testify before a congressional
committee about the attacks
tomorrow, chief foreign affairs
correspondent Margaret Warner
catches us up on the
facts of the case.
MARGARET WARNER: This fiery
scene at the U.S. Consulate in
Benghazi, Libya, took place
three
years ago, but it sparked a
political war of words that's
still being fought.
Thirteen months after the fall
of dictator Moammar Gadhafi,
Benghazi was lawless and
awash with guns. The U.S.
mission was protected by one
local militia and unarmed
contractor
guards. On the anniversary of
9/11, around 9:40 p.m., heavily
armed men stormed the compound,
opening fire and torching
some of its buildings.
Hours later, a CIA annex less
than a mile away came under
mortar attack. U.S. Ambassador
Christopher Stevens died in the
main compound, along with
Foreign Service officer Sean
Smith,
apparently of smoke inhalation.
Two contractors, ex-Navy SEALs
Tyrone Woods and Glen Doherty,
died at the annex.
Then-Defense Secretary Leon
Panetta said U.S. commanders had
no intelligence that an attack
was coming on the Benghazi
mission, and U.S. forces were
too far away to help when it
did.
LEON PANETTA, Former U.S.
Defense Secretary: Frankly,
without an adequate warning,
there
wasn't enough time, given the
speed of the attack, for armed
military assets to respond.
MARGARET WARNER: In the
aftermath, the military did
deploy elite teams of U.S.
Marines from
Rota, Spain, one to Benghazi to
evacuate personnel, the other to
fortify the U.S. Embassy in
Tripoli.
The Benghazi assault followed
anti-U.S. protests that day in a
half-dozen Islamic countries.
In Cairo, a mob breached the
walls of the heavily-fortified
U.S. Embassy, tearing down
the U.S. flag. No
Americans were harmed.
All those protests were against
an American citizen's online
movie mocking the Prophet
Mohammed. Five days later, on
the Sunday talk shows, then-U.N.
Ambassador Susan Rice pointed
to a linkage.
SUSAN RICE, U.S. National
Security Adviser: What this
began as was a spontaneous, not
a premeditated, response to
what had transpired in Cairo.
MARGARET WARNER: But Republicans
charged the White House knew
almost immediately Benghazi
was a terror attack, and
concealed it to protect
President Obama's reelection
campaign.
The administration insisted
Ambassador Rice was speaking
from the best information
available
at the time. Four months later,
then-Secretary of State Hillary
Clinton took on Senate
Republicans
at a hearing.
HILLARY RODHAM CLINTON (D),
Presidential Candidate: The fact
is, we had four dead Americans.
Was
it because of a protest or was
it because of guys out for a
walk one night who decided
they would go kill some
Americans? What difference at
this point does this make? It is
our job
to figure out what happened and
do everything we can to prevent
it from ever happening again.
MARGARET WARNER: The incident
launched parallel investigations
by the FBI, the State
Department,
and Congress to do just that.
One was by an independent
accountability review board
appointed
by Secretary Clinton and headed
by retired former Ambassador
Thomas Pickering.
That December, it issued a
stinging report on what happened
that night. And it called
the consulate's security posture
inadequate for Benghazi and
grossly inadequate to deal
with the attack.
THOMAS PICKERING, Former U.S.
Ambassador to the United
Nations: It was deficient in
security
supplies. It was probably
deficient in the security
manning of the post.
There were ongoing security
problems in Benghazi, which we
felt should have alerted the
department
to deal with those issues. Many
of the questions presented to
the department were answered
in the negative, when they
probably should have been
positively responded to.
MARGARET WARNER: And are you
saying there were requests for
additional security there
and they were denied?
THOMAS PICKERING: There was an
ongoing request for additional
security, and a number of them
were not responded to
properly and positively, yes.
MARGARET WARNER: The Pickering
review cited -- quote --
"systemic failures and
leadership
and management deficiencies at
the State Department, a
consulate that was severely
under-resourced
with regard to certain needed
security equipment, and a
short-term staff rotation that
resulted
in diminished institutional
knowledge, continuity and
mission capacity."
Pickering said the review board
closely examined whether the
U.S. military could have
scrambled
forces elsewhere to
the attack site.
THOMAS PICKERING: And it was
very clear to us that the
nearest assistance was called
upon right away, but the
requirement to mobilize aircraft
and move those Marines in Spain
wasn't
sufficient to get
it there in time.
MARGARET WARNER: Three State
Department officials resigned
immediately after that report.
The
report didn't fault
Secretary Clinton.
Did you try to follow the chain
of command, as it were, the
chain of responsibility all
the way to the top?
THOMAS PICKERING: Absolutely.
MARGARET WARNER: So, did it ever
go to the secretary of state?
THOMAS PICKERING: I had no
indication that any of these
decisions went to the secretary
of state.
MARGARET WARNER: And do these
decisions usually go to the
secretary of state?
THOMAS PICKERING: No, they
wouldn't normally go to the
secretary of state. These were
decisions
about should we provide X-kind
of money to build a wall?
MARGARET WARNER: Meanwhile, the
man charged as a ringleader of
the Benghazi attacks, Ahmed
Abu Khattala, faces a federal
trial in Washington after being
captured by U.S. special forces
last year.
I'm Margaret Warner for the
"PBS NewsHour" in Washington.
JUDY WOODRUFF: One in every 68
children in the U.S. is
diagnosed as being on the autism
spectrum. It's long been known
that genetics plays a role in
the neurodevelopmental disorder.
Now scientists believe they have
the tools to identify which gene
variants trigger autism
and with that information
diagnose and treat it much
earlier. A project called MSSNG
has
brought together an unusual
partnership and is giving hope
to affected families.
Special correspondent
Jackie Judd reports.
WOMAN: What's the
highest you can go?
JACKIE JUDD: In the cloud, he is
known only by eight digits,
attached to a map of his
DNA.
WOMAN: Oh, you can go high.
JACKIE JUDD: On the ground, at
his home outside of Toronto,
Jonathan Wilson is known as a
bright and sometimes
aggressive 14-year old.
LISA WILSON, Mother of Jonathan
Wilson: From day one -- and,
literally, I mean day one
-- he was very different
from my other newborns.
BLAIR WILSON, Father of Jonathan
Wilson: I remember, with the
other children, I would
hold them over my shoulder and
cuddle with them. And John would
just arch his back, wouldn't
want to be -- wouldn't
want to be held.
JACKIE JUDD: It wasn't until
Jonathan was almost 3 that he
was diagnosed with autism.
That was based on what doctors
could observe, his behavior and
the absence of typical
developmental
milestones.
JONATHAN WILSON, Autistic: It's
hard for me to know when to
speak, hard to communicate.
BLAIR WILSON: Watch
where you're shooting.
JACKIE JUDD: But it was only
recently that Lisa and Blair
Wilson learned, with great
precision, why their son is
autistic: a spontaneous genetic
mutation on chromosome 16.
LISA WILSON: I got the phone
call, and it stopped me in my
tracks, and I called Blair
at work, and I immediately burst
into tears, and I said, this
changes everything and nothing.
Nothing changes about how we
live our lives, but he now is
able to say, definitively; I
have autism. I was born
with it. It's genetic.
MAN: These machines actually are
able to sequence millions and
millions of DNA fragments.
JACKIE JUDD: The call came from
researchers here at Toronto's
Hospital for Sick Children,
which is a partner in a
pioneering project to identify
genetic variants responsible for
autism.
Jonathan, his parents and his
three brothers all had their
entire DNA mapped or sequenced,
so researchers could see the
most minute deletions or
duplications.
DR. STEPHEN SCHERER, Toronto
Hospital for Sick Children:
Every time a new genome comes
in, we can run a dynamic
kind of reassessment.
JACKIE JUDD: Dr. Stephen
Scherer, whose team reviewed
Jonathan's genome, is one of the
world's leading geneticists.
DR. STEPHEN SCHERER: Now we have
the capability to do the ideal
experiment, and that is to
sequence the entire genome, the
entire complement of DNA of all
of these families, and decode
the underpinnings of autism.
JACKIE JUDD: And, from that,
diagnose and treat autism
possibly from birth, as well
as identify other health
problems often associated with
the disorder.
Autism Speaks began the MSSNG
project with the audacious goal
of completing the DNA mapping
of 10,000 people affected by
autism and then making that
information widely available in
a single place.
Rob Ring is the advocacy
organization's chief science
officer.
ROB RING, Chief Science Officer,
Autism Speaks: In that database
will be families, individuals
touched by autism, their
siblings, parents, all their
genomes. That is a massive data
set.
JACKIE JUDD: How massive?
ROB RING: It's huge. It's the
equivalent of a -- watching a
high-definition TV show
streaming
continuously for 13.5 years.
JACKIE JUDD: Autism Speaks had
the will and the resources, $50
million, to undertake the
project. The Hospital for Sick
Children had the expertise to
map an individual's DNA,
which now costs only $1,000 and
takes only a couple of weeks to
go from blood sample
to complete gene mapping.
What to do with that massive
amount of data being generated
led them to a third partner
not known for its work in
genetics. It led them to Google.
Most consumers know Google
as the go-to search engine to
sort information about everyday
things, like restaurant rankings
or weather patterns.
For the MSSNG project, Google
stores participants' genomes in
the cloud and then applies its
vast analytic power to
questions from researchers.
DAVID GLAZER, Google Genomics:
To date, this is the biggest.
JACKIE JUDD: David Glazer heads
Google's growing genomics
division.
DAVID GLAZER: What we realized a
couple years ago is that the
world of biology has started
to generate a lot more
information than they
historically had tools to work
with.
And that's what we at Google are
really good at, is taking large
amounts of information
and finding the value in that
information. What we're doing
with the MSSNG project is
saying, you guys are generating
and gathering, from all the
volunteer families, this really
valuable set of information. Let
us help make that information as
valuable as possible.
JACKIE JUDD: So far, 76
researchers from six countries,
exploring the causes of autism,
including environmental factors,
have gained entry to the new
portal. And they are posing
questions that only powerful
search engines could process.
DAVID GLAZER: We had to build
tools that could work with data
sets that were trillions of
rows of information. That's
trillions with a T. That tool is
good at working with lots
and lots of information and
finding patterns in an
interactive way.
DR. STEPHEN SCHERER: Right away,
we get some information that
helps in developing new
diagnostic
tests. And, secondly, we can
think about new medicines. This
is the problem right now.
The challenge is, for the core
features of autism, there's no
effective medical treatment.
JACKIE JUDD: The researchers
applying for entry to the DNA
library in the cloud pay
nothing if approved. That is
unique in a field where access
to data can be closely guarded
and expensive.
ROB RING: Our central thesis, if
you will, around MSSNG was, the
more eyes we can get
on a data set like that, the
greater the probability that
discoveries are going to be
made, discoveries
that have the potential to
transform how we think about
autism, how we diagnose it, and
ultimately how we treat it.
JACKIE JUDD: The optimism of
MSSNG's founders about the
potential for unlimited
discovery
is apparent. And they believe
that what works for autism may
work for any number of other
diseases.
DAVID GLAZER: They will all
build on each other, and the
success of one will help all.
JACKIE JUDD: In fact, Google
already is exploring a project
in the cancer field.
DAVID GLAZER: The model is in
the pattern of how to take this
kind of information and
allow scientists to ask the
kinds of questions they want.
There are thousands of very rare
diseases that would benefit from
having a deeper genomic
understanding of their
condition.
JACKIE JUDD: Lisa and Blair
Wilson hope their contributions
to MSSNG spare other parents
some of the anguish they
experienced when they knew that
something was wrong with their
little boy, just not what.
LISA WILSON: I think starting
intervention at age 3 was very
late, compared to how early
our concerns began about him.
And if we could have intervened
earlier in the trajectory
of his development, we could
have influenced it sooner.
BLAIR WILSON: And I think that
would have really helped him
along his journey.
JACKIE JUDD: So far, MSSNG has
put the genomes of 2,300 people
in the cloud, and all 10,000
are expected to be up by next
spring, among them, the
complicated map of a Canadian
teenager
with the simple hope of one day
living an independent life
filled with family and friends.
For the "PBS NewsHour," this
is Jackie Judd in Toronto.
GWEN IFILL: Whether it is the
vibrant colors of autumn leaves,
or the smell of crisp mountain
air, nature has inspired poets
for centuries, including one of
this year's MacArthur grant
winners.
Ellen Bryant Voigt takes us on a
journey through her poetry and
the countryside that serves
as her muse.
ELLEN BRYANT VOIGT, Poet: My
name is Ellen Bryant Voigt. I'm
a poet and a teacher. I
live in rural Vermont. I
have been here since 1969.
When I look back over all the
poems that I have written, I
notice a couple of concerns
or obsessions that kept
recurring. And one of them has
to do with the relationship
between
the individual soul and the
collective, however you want to
define collective. We might
define
it as family. You can define
that as small town, the world,
the natural world.
And very often, that individual
soul is in conflict with the
larger one. And that, I
think, I can trace back to
coming from lots and lots of
relatives close by in a small
area, a small town that
knew all of your business.
(LAUGHTER)
ELLEN BRYANT VOIGT: "If you have
been, let's say, a
glass-half-empty kind of girl,
you
wake to the chorus of geese
overhead, forlorn, for something
has softened their nasal voices,
their ugly aggression. On the
ground, they're worse than
chickens. But flying, one leader
falling back, another moving up
to pierce the wind. No one in
charge or every one in
charge, in flight, each limited
goose adjusts its part in the
cluster just under the clouds.
Do they mean together to
duplicate the cloud?"
I have a great interest in the
rhythms of the natural world. I
try to observe it. And
then I try to come to some
understanding that I didn't have
before. Poetry allowed me to
observe it, and then to try to
find the language that is
precise enough for the
complexities
around that world.
I think I have always looked for
a high degree of solitude. Music
was a wonderful haven for
me as a child. It was a place
that -- where I could find that
solitude and find something
I was passionate about. Music,
to my mind, is a crucial part of
all poems, the rhythm
of it, the rhythm of the line,
the long vowel, the short vowel.
If I can hear a line that is
intriguing and is interesting
rhythmically, then I can go
follow it toward my 50 to 100
drafts, which is about how long
it takes me to do a poem.
"Storm."
"One minute, a slender pine
indistinguishable from the
others, the next, its trunk
horizontal,
still green, the jagged stump a
nest for the flickers. One
minute, high wind and rain,
the skies lit up, the next, a
few bright winking stars, the
lashing of the brook. One
minute,
an exaltation in the apple
trees, the shadblow trees, the
next, white trash on the ground,
new birds, or the same birds
crowding the feeder."
To write poems, I have to remind
myself sometimes to go out into
the world. I love the natural
beauty. I love living in the
country. I love the solitude.
But to only that, to live on
the mountaintop, I think,
wouldn't be good for poems.
I think that poetry has become
more visible and more a part of
the fabric of the culture
than it's often referred to.
More books of poetry are being
published now than ever before.
I think that there's a
great hunger for that.
It's -- we get a lot of
information. We're bombarded
with information. But I think,
especially
in this country, there are very
few ways in which we can process
any of that or that we
can think hard about that. We
need to slow down in order to
think hard about it. And
the poem will slow us down.
It will slow us down.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Finally,
to our "NewsHour" Shares.
Today's, it one of our online
videos. And it's about the
personal testimonies of drug
addiction and its impact in West
Virginia. As we heard earlier,
President Obama traveled
to that state today, where he
took part in a community forum
on those very problems.
High schoolers from our Student
Reporting Lab in Richwood, West
Virginia, attended the
event. They interviewed members
of the community affected by all
this.
Here's an excerpt.
DARLENE CLUTTER, Librarian: I
have got a sister that died a
few months ago that was just a
few years younger than me
because she became addicted to
medications that the doctors had
prescribed to her.
LAKIN CLARK, Recovering Addict:
I started using drugs when I was
like 12, probably smoking
weed, just -- probably
just to fit in.
AMY PODDEY, Recovering Addict: I
got arrested on two felony
delivery charges.
DENISE HUGHES, Recovering
Addict: I got arrested on two
felony delivery charges, and as
part
of my bond stipulation, I had to
go to DRC. I have been in there
13 months.
LAKIN CLARK: And I just didn't
-- I didn't know how to live
without drugs. It was how
I felt I had to have them to get
up in the morning. I had to have
them to do anything.
I had to have them to live.
AMY PODDEY: When it is
happening, you don't really
realize that the drugs are
taking over
your body and your mind. You
think that everything is still
OK.
DENISE HUGHES: I have tried -- I
mean, I have tried a lot. I have
not done heroin, but have
I done my share. And it's not
something I'm proud of. It's
wrecked my life.
AMY PODDEY: I have two children.
I have a 10-year-old and a
13-year-old. And for those
two years, I didn't wake up
thinking, I got to get my kids
up for school or I got to do
this. I woke up thinking, how
am I going to get high today?
LAKIN CLARK: What I learned
today is addiction is a disease,
and it kills people. It really
does.
AMY PODDEY: My little boy, one
day, we were at GoMart. He said,
"Mom, will you me a chocolate
milk?" And I said, "I don't have
enough money to." But I had 50
bucks in my pocket and I
went and bought a pill with it.
LAKIN CLARK: I never had much to
do with my son. I would take him
to my mom's house and
I would leave him there for days
at a time, sometimes weeks.
DARLENE CLUTTER: So, for me, you
know, it was just -- it is
heart-wrenching, because
I have seen so many people that
I absolutely just love have
their lives ruined because
of it.
JUDY WOODRUFF: It's
very hard to watch.
And you can find more videos
from our Student Reporting Labs
at studentreportinglabs.com.
GWEN IFILL: On the "NewsHour"
online right now: Global warming
might tighten your wallet
no matter where you live. That's
according to a new study from
Stanford University that
pinpoints the optimal annual
temperature for economic
productivity. What happens when
temperatures
rise? Find out on our Web
site, PBS.org/NewsHour.
JUDY WOODRUFF: And that's the
"NewsHour" for tonight. I'm Judy
Woodruff.
GWEN IFILL: And I'm Gwen Ifill.
Join us online and again here
tomorrow evening. For all of us
here at the "PBS NewsHour,"
thank you, and good night.